[Music]
what is the free energy principle so
it's just a formal mathematical
prescription of the way that things
behave that you can then use to either
simulate or reproduce or indeed explain
the behavior of things in the film The
Matrix of course your brain's reality is
the reality you think of and understand
and it is not receiving external input
most of what the brain is actually in
charge of is moving the body or
secreting those are the only two ways
you can change the universe you can
either the move a muscle or secrete
something you cannot bend the spoon with
your
[Music]
brain this is Star Talk special edition
Neil degrass Tyson here your personal
astrophysicist and if this is special
edition you know it means we've got not
only Chuck Knight how you doing man hey
buddy always good to have you there as
my co-host and we also have Gary
O'Reilly former Soccer Pro Sports
commentator was that the crowd cheering
them on yeah that's the that's the crowd
at uh Tottenham Tottenham yeah Crystal
Palace they're
all anytime you mention my name in this
room there's a crowd
effect Gary you know with special
edition what you've helped do with this
branch of Star Talk is focus on The
Human Condition and every way that
matters to it the Mind Body Soul it
would include AI a mechanical
augmentation to who and what we are
robotics so this is fits right in to
that theme so take us where you need for
this episode in the age of AI and
machine learning uh we as a society and
naturally as Star Talk are asking all
sorts of questions about the human brain
how it works and how we can apply it to
machines
one of these big questions being
perception uh how do you get a blob of
neurons I think that's a technical term
yes technical for sure yeah in your
skull to understand the world outside
our guest KL friston is one of the
world's leading neuroscientist and an
authority on neuroimaging theoretical
neuroscience and the architect of the
free energy
principle using physics inspired
statistical methods to model
neuroimaging data that's one of big
successes he's also sought after by the
people in the machine learning Universe
now just to give you a little background
on Carl a neuroscientist and
theoretician at University College
London where he is a professor studied
physics and psychology at Cambridge
University in England an inventor of the
statistical parametric mapping used
around the world and neuroimaging plus
many other fascinating things he is the
owner of a seriously impressive array of
honors and awards which we do not have
time to get into and he speaks Brit yes
so he's evened this out there's no more
picking on the brick because there's
only one of them okay Carl friston
welcome to Star Talk well thank you very
much for having me I should just point
out I can speak American as well please
don't Carl that that takes a certain
level of illiteracy that I'm sure that
you don't
possess yeah please don't stoop to our
level
so let's let's start off with uh
something is it a field or is it a
principle or is it a an idea that you
pioneered which is in our notes known as
the free energy principle I come to this
as a physicist and there's a lot of sort
of
and in what way they apply so let's just
start off what is the free energy
principle well as it says on the ti it
is a principle and um in the spirit of
physics it is therefore a method so it's
just like Hamilton's principle Bast
action so it's just a prescription a
formal mathematical prescription of the
way that things behave that you can then
use to either simulate or reproduce or
indeed explain the behavior of things so
you might apply the principle released
action for example uh to describe the
motion of a football the free energy
principle it's has a special domain of
application it it talks about the
self-organization of things uh where
things can be particles they can be
people they can be population so it's a
it's a method really of describing
things that self-organize them
themselves
into space very so but why give it this
whole new term you know we've all read
about or or or thought about or seeing
the self-organization of matter usually
there's a source of energy there
available though or it reaches sort of a
minimum energy because that's what ite
it's a state that it prefers to have you
know so so A ball rolls off a table onto
the ground it doesn't roll off the
ground onto the table so it's seeks the
minimum place and my favorite of these
is the the box of morning breakfast
cereal and it will always say some
settling of contents may have occurred
yeah and you open up and it's like
2third full two3 of of powder you get
two-thirds of crushed shards of H Corn
Flakes so it's it's finding sort of the
lowest place in the gra Earth's
gravitational potential so why the need
for this this new term well it's an old
term I guess um again pursuing the
American theme you can trace the um this
kind of free energy back to Richard fan
in probably his PhD thesis so he was he
was trying to deal with the problem of
describing the behavior of small
particles and invented this kind of free
energy as a proxy that enabled him to
evaluate the probability that a particle
would take this path or that path have
so exactly the same mats now has been
transplanted and applied not to the
movement of particles back to what we
refer to as belief updating so it's
lovely you should introduce this notion
of um you know nature finding its
preferred state that can be described as
you know rolling downhill to those free
energy Minima this is exactly the
ambition behind the free energy
principle but the preferred States here
are States of beliefs or representations
about a world in which something say you
or I exist so we this is a point of
contact with machine learning and
artificial intelligence so the free
energy is not a thermodynamic free
energy it is a free energy that scores a
probability of your explanation for the
world in your head being the right kind
of explanation and you can now think
about our existence the way that we make
sense of the world and our Behavior the
way that we sample that world as
effectively falling downhill to to that
settling towards the bottom but an
extremely itinerant way in a Wandering
Way as we sort of go through our daily
lives at different temporal scales it
can all be described effectively as um
coagulating at the bottom of the of the
serial packet in our preferred States
wow so you're again if I don't want to
put words in your mouth that don't
belong there this is just my attempt to
interpret and understand what you just
described you didn't yet mention neurons
which are the carriers of all of this or
the transmitters of all of this thoughts
and memories and interpretations of the
world so when you talk about the
pathways that an an understanding of the
world takes shape do those Pathways
track the nearly semi- infinite
connectivity of neurons in our brains
and it is so you're finding what the
neuron it will naturally do in the face
of one stimulus versus another that's
absolutely right in fact technically you
can describe neuronal Dynamics the the
trajectory or the path of nerve nerve
cell firing exactly as performing a
gradient descent on this variational
free energy so that is literally true
but I think more intuitively the idea is
um in fact the idea you've just
expressed um which is you can trace back
Poss L to the early days of cybernetics
in terms of the good regulat theorem the
idea here is that to be well adapted to
your
environment you have to be a model of
that environment um in other words to
interface and interact with your world
through your Sensations you have to have
a model of the causal structure in that
world and that causal structure is
thought to be literally embedded in the
connectivity within your among your
neurons within your brain so you know my
favorite example of this um would be the
distinction between where something is
and what something is so in our universe
you your a certain object can be in
different positions so if you tell me
what something is you wouldn't I
wouldn't know where it was likewise if
you told me where something was I
wouldn't know what it was that
statistical separation if you like is
literally installed in in our anatomy so
you know there are two streams in the
back of the brain one dealing with where
things are and and while scam of
connectivity dealing dealing with what
things are however uh we are pliable
enough though uh and of course I'm not
pushing back I'm just trying to further
understand uh we're pliable enough
though that if you were to say go get me
the thing okay and then you give me very
specific coordinates of the thing I
would not have to know what the thing is
and I would be able to find it even if
there are other things that are there
yep that and that speaks to um something
which is quite remarkable about
ourselves that we actually have a model
of our lived world that has this sort of
geometry that can be navigated because
that presupposes you've got a model of
yourself moving in a world and you know
the way that your your body works I'm
tempted here to bring in groins but I
don't no
was Chuck injured his gr a few a few
days
ago offline that's all he's been talking
about we've all heard about it since
Carl I hear the term active inference
and then I hear the term basian active
inference let's start with active
inference what is it how does it play a
part in cognitive Neuroscience active
inference I think most simply put would
be an application of this free energy
principle we're talking about so it's
it's a description of
applying the maths to understand how we
behave in a sentient way so active
inference is meant to emphasize that
perception read as unconscious inference
in the spirit of Helm holds depends upon
the data that we actively solicit from
the environment you know so what I see
depends upon where I am currently
looking so this speaks to the notion of
active sensing you went a little fast
I'm I'm I'm sorry man I'm trying to keep
up here okay but you went a little fast
there Carl uh you talked about
perception um being an inference that is
somehow tied to the subconscious but
when you can you just do that again
please and just to be clear he's
speaking slowly exactly so it's not that
he's going fast no is that you are not
keeping up well listen I I don't have a
problem okay I have no problem not
keeping up which is why I have never
been left behind by the way I have no
problem keeping up because I go wait a
minute okay so anyway can you just like
break that down a little bit for me sure
I I I was trying to speak at a New York
Pace my apologies I I'll I'll revert to
London um okay so let's start at the
beginning sense making perception how do
we make sense of the world we are locked
inside our brains are locked inside a
skull it's dark in there there's no you
can't see other than what information is
conveyed by your eyes or by your ears or
by your skin your sensory organs so you
have to make sense of this unstructured
data coming in from your sensory organs
your sensory epithelia how might you do
that the answer to that or one answer to
that can be traced back to the days of
Plato through count and helmold so Helm
helds brought up this notion of
unconscious inance um sounds very
glorious but very very simply it says
that if inside your head you've got a
model of how your Sensations were caused
then you can use this model to generate
a prediction of what you would sense if
this was the right CA if you got the
right
hypothesis and if what you predict
matches what you actually sense then you
can confirm your
hypothesis so this is where inference
gets into the game it's very much like a
scientist who has to use scientific
instruments say microscopes or
telescopes in order to acquire the right
kind of data to test her hypotheses
about the structure of the universe
about the the State of Affairs out there
as measured by her uh instruments so
this can be described this sort of
hypothesis testing putting your your
fantasies your hypotheses your beliefs
about the State of Affairs outside your
skull to to test um by sampling data and
testing your hypotheses this is just
inference so this is where inference uh
gets into the game so these are micro
steps on route to establishing an
objective
reality and they're people for whom
their model does not match a prediction
they might make for the world outside of
them and they would be living in some
delusional some world that you cannot
otherwise agree to what is objectively
true and that would be that would then
be an objective measure of insanity or
some other
neological disconnect yeah really though
I mean is it really well if you if you
project your own Fantastical world into
reality that and you know it doesn't sit
but it's what you want then that's a
dysfunction you're not working with
you're working against but we we live in
a time now yeah where that fast
Fantastical
dysfunction actually has a place and
talked to James Cameron for just a
little bit and you'll see that that fast
Fantastical
dysfunction has was a worldbuilding
creation that we see now as a series of
movies so is it really so you know
aberant that it's you know a disfunction
or is it just different well I think
he's trying to create artistically
rather than impose upon yeah so Carl if
everyone always received the world
objectively would there be room for art
at all oh that was a good question
really was well done
sir I'm gonna say I think I was the uh
inspiration for that question yes Chuck
inspired that question so there's a role
for each of each side of this the
perceptive reality correct no absolutely
so it's pick up on a couple of those
themes but that last point was I think
quite key it is certainly the case that
one application of or one use of active
inference is to understand psychiatric
disorders so you're absolutely right
when people a model of their lived world
that's not quite apt for the situation
in which they find themselves say
something changes say you lose a loved
one so your world changes so your
predictions and the way that you sort of
navigate through your day either
socially or physically is now changed so
your model is no longer fit for purpose
for this world but as Chuck was saying
before the brain is incredibly plastic
and adaptive so what you can do is you
can use the misl between what you
predict is going to happen and what you
actually sense to update your model of
the world and before I was saying that
this is um a model that would be able to
generate predictions of what you you
would see under a particular hypothesis
or or fantasy and just to make a link
back to AI this is generative AI it's
intelligent forecasting prediction under
a Jed model that is entailed exactly by
the connectivity that we were talking
about before in the brain and it's the
free energy principle manifesting when
you readjust to the changes and it's
finding the new
roots that are presumably the more
accurate your understanding of Your
World the lower is that free energy
state or is it higher or lower what is
it's yeah that is absolutely right so
actually technically you know if you go
into the cognitive U neurosciences
you'll find a big move in the past 10
years towards this notion of predictive
processing and predictive coding which
again just rests upon this meane that we
are our brains are constructive organs
generating from the inside our
predictions of the sensorium and then
the the mismatch is now a prediction
error that prediction eror is then used
to drive the
neurodynamics that then allow for this
revising or updating my beliefs so um
such that my predictions now are more
accurate and therefore the prediction
error is minimized the key thing is to
answer your question technically the
gradients of the free energy that drive
you downhill just are the prediction
errors so when you minimized when you
minimized your free energy
you've absolutely excellent and you're
not going to roll uphill unless there's
some other change to your environment so
if we think back to early
Mankind and the predictability so I'm
walking along I see a lion in the long
grass what do I start to predict if I
run up a tree high enough that lion
won't get me but if I run along the
ground the Line's probably going to get
is this kind of evolutionary that we've
born for survival yes or have I
misinterpreted this completely no no I
think that's an excellent point um well
let's just think about what it means to
um be able to predict exactly what you
would sense in a given situation and
thereby predict also what's going to
happen next if you can do that with your
environment and you've reached the
bottom of the serial packet and you
minimize your Fe and you minimize your
prediction errors you now can fit the
world you can model the world in an
accurate way that just is adaptive
Fitness so if you look at this process
now as unfolding over evolutionary time
youve just you can now read the
variation of free energy or it's
negative as adaptive Fitness so that
tells you immediately that Evolution
itself is one of these free energy
minimizing processes it is also if you
like testing
hypotheses about the kind of Denis of
its environment the kind of creatures
that that will be a good fit for this
particular environment so you can
actually read natural selection as what
in statistics will be known as basian
model selection so you are infected
inheriting inferences or learning
transgenerationally in a way that's
minimizing your free energy minimizing
your prediction errors so things that
get eaten by lions don't have the
ability to promate propagate themselves
through to the Next Generation so that
everything ends up bottom of the serial
packet uh avoiding lines because those
are the only things that can be there
because the other ones didn't minimize
their free energy yeah unless Gary you
made babies before you said I wonder if
that's a lion in the bushes let me go
check but if they've got my jeans then
there's a line with their name on it
that's exactly right I want to share
with you one observation Carl and then I
want to hand back to Gary because I know
he wants to get all in the AI side of
this yeah I remembered one of the books
by Douglas hoffstead it might have been
girdle eer Bach or or he had a few more
that were brilliant Explorations into
the Mind and Body in the end of one of
his books he had was an appendix I don't
remember a conversation with Einstein's
brain and I said to myself this is
stupid what what does this even mean and
then he went and describe the fact that
imagine Einstein's brain could be
preserved at the moment he died and all
the neurosynaptic elements are still in
place and it's just sitting there in a
jar and you ask a question and the
question goes into his ears gets
transmitted into the sounds that trigger
neurosynaptic firings it just moves
through the brain and then Einstein then
speaks and
answer and the way that setup was
established it was like yeah I can
picture this sometime in the distant
future now maybe the modern version of
that is you upload your Consciousness
and then you're asking your your brain
in a jar but it's not biological at that
point it's it's in Silicon but what I'm
asking is the information going into
Einstein's brain in that thought
experiment
presumably trigger his thoughts and then
his need to answer that question because
it was posed as a question could you
just comment on that exercise the
exercise of probing a brain that's
sitting there waiting for you to ask it
a question I it's a very um specific and
interesting example of the kind of
predicted processing that we are capable
of because we're talking about language
and communication here and and just note
the way that you set up that question
provides a lovely segue into large
language models um but note also that
it's not the kind of embodied
intelligence that we were talking about
with in relation to active inference
because there's no the brain is in a
body the brain is embodied most of what
the brain is actually in charge of is
moving the body or secreting in fact the
those are the only two ways you can
change the universe you can either move
a muscle or secrete something there is
no other way that you can affect the the
universe so this means that you have to
deploy your body in a way to sample the
right kind of information that makes
your um your model as apt or as adaptive
as possible well so Chuck did you hear
what he said it means you cannot bend
the spoon with your brain right so that
to Yuri
G just to clarify okay so what I was
trying to hint at I suspect it's going
to come up in L conversation that
there's I think a difference between a
brain and a vat or a large language
model that is the involement of lots of
knowledge so one can imagine say a large
language model being a little bit like
Einstein's brain but Einstein plus you
know 100 um possibly million other
people and the history of everything
that has been written that you you can
Pro by asking it questions and in fact
there are people whose entire career is
now prompt Engineers AI prompts y it's
funny the people who program AI then
leave that job to become
prompt the people who uh are responsible
for uh creating the best prompts to get
the most information back out of AI so
it's a pretty fascinating industry that
that that they've created their own
feedback loop that benefits them and now
you can start to argue you know who
where where is the intelligence is it in
the prompt engineer as a scientist I
would say that's where the intelligence
is that's where the sort of senting
behavior is it's asking the questions
not producing the ANW that's the easy
bit it's you know asking quering the
world in the right way and just notice
what what are we all doing what what is
your job is it asking the right
questions Carl can I ask you this please
um could active inference cause us to
miss things that do happen and secondly
does deja vu fit into this yes and um
yes um oh so um in a sense active
inference um is really about missing
things that uh are measurable or
observable in the right kind of way um
so another another sort of key thing
about natural intelligence um and be a
good scientist just to to um point out
that sort of noting the discovering
infrared that's an Act of Creation that
is Art so yeah where that come from from
somebody's model about the structure of
electromagnetic radiation so you know I
think just to pick up on on a point we
missed earlier on creativity and insight
um is an emerging property of this kind
of question answering in an effort to
improve our models you know or our
particular world coming back to uh
Missing stuff you know it always
fascinates me that the way that we can
move depends upon ignoring the fact
we're not moving so I'm talking now
about a phenomena in um cognitive
science called sensory attenuation and
this is the rather paradoxical or at
least counterintuitive phenomena that in
order to initiate a movement we have to
ignore and switch off and suppress any
sensory evidence that we're not
currently moving and my favorite example
of this is uh moving your eyes so if I
asked you to sort of track my finger as
Ive M it across the screen and you moved
your eyes very very quickly while your
eyes are moving you're actually not
seeing the optic flow that's being
produced because you are engaging
something called ptic suppression and
this is a reflection of the brain very
cleverly knowing that that particular
optic flow that I have induced is fake
news so the ability to ignore fake news
is absolutely essential for good
navigation and movement uh of our world
is it fake or just irrelevant to the
moment if it's the New York Times it's
definitely fake fake
news but it's not it's not so much fake
it's just not relevant to the task at
hand isn't that a different notion it's
a subtle one I for the Simplicity of the
conversation and uh then I I'm reading
fake as irrelevant imprecise so it's
like it's unusable so your brain is just
throwing it out basically like don't
don't nothing to see here so get rid of
that moving so Neil Neil this is this is
in your backyard rather more than mine
but isn't this where the Matrix pretext
kind of fits in that our perception
might differ from what's actually out
there and then perception can be
manipulated or recreated well I think
Carl's descendants will just put us all
in a jar the way he's talking Carl Carl
what is your laboratory look like full
of Jaws well yes well there are there
are several pods and we have been
waiting for you in the film The Matrix
of course which came out in
1999 now 25 years you quarter century
ago which is hard to believe what the it
was very candid un sense that your
brain's reality is the reality you think
of and understand and it is not
receiving external input all that your
brain is
constructing is detached from what's
exterior to it and if you've had enough
lived experience or maybe in that future
that they're describing the brain can be
implanted with memory it reminds me
what's that movie that Arnold schweger
is in about Mars um Total Recall Total
Recall thank you thank get your ass to
Mars instead of paying thousands of
dollars to go on vacation they would
just implant the memories of a vacation
in you yeah and bypassing the sensory
conduits into your brain of course these
are movies and their stories and it's
it's science fiction H how science
fictiony is it really well I certainly
think that the you the philosophy uh
behind I think probably both Total
Recall uh but particularly The Matrix um
I I think that's very real and very
current um you know just going back to
our understanding people with
psychiatric orders or perhaps real
people um who have odd views World World
Views to understand that the way that
you make sense of the world can be very
different from the way I make sense of
the world dependent on my history my
predispositions and my prize what I have
learned thus far and also the
information that I select to attend to
so just pursuing this theme of ignoring
99% of all the sensations for example um
Chuck are you thinking about your groin
at the moment I would guarantee you're
not and yet it is generating sensory
impulses from the nerve endings uh but
you at this point in time were not
selecting that so the capacity to select
is I you know I think a fundamental part
of intelligence and agency but of course
to select means that you are not
attending to or selecting 99% of the
things that you could select so I think
this you know the notion of selection is
is a Hallmark of truly intelligent uh
Behavior yeah are you analogizing that
to large language models in the sense
that it could give you gibberish it
could find crap anywhere in the world
that's online but because you prompted
it precisely it is going to find only
the information necessary and ignore
everything else yes I I know but that's
a really really good example um so the
yes part is that the the characteristic
bit of AR ecture that makes large
language models work certainly those
that are implemented using Transformer
architectures are something called
attention heads so it is exactly the
same mechanism the same basic mechanics
uh that we were talking about in terms
of intentional selection that makes
Transformers work so they select the
recent past in order to predict the next
word that's why they work to selectively
pick out something in the past ignore
everything else to make them work when
you talk about that probability in a in
an llm that probability is a
mathematical equation that happens for
like every single letter that's coming
out of that model so it is literally
just giving you the best probability of
what is going to come next okay whereas
when we perceive things we do so from a
world view so for an llm if you show it
up picture of a ball with a red stripe
that's next to a house okay and say
that's a ball and then show it a picture
of a ball in the hands of a little girl
who's bouncing it it's going to say all
right that might be a ball that may not
be a ball whereas if you show even a
two-year-old child this is a ball and
then take that ball and place it in any
circumstance the baby will look at it
and go th B so there is a difference in
the kind of intelligence that we're
talking about here yeah I think that's
spot on that's absolutely right and and
that's why I said yes and no so okay you
know that kind of
fluency um that you see in large
language models is very compelling and
it's very easy to give the illusion that
these things have some understanding or
some intelligence but they don't have
the right kind of generative model
underneath to be to generalize and
recognize a ball in different context
the way that we do well it would if if
it was set up correctly and that setup
is no different from you looking at
reading the scene I mean a police
officer does that busting into a room
you know who's the perpetrator who's not
before you shoot there's an
instantaneous awareness factor that you
have to draw from your exterior stimuli
and so because you know I'm reminded of
here Carl I saw one of these New Yorker
style cartoons where there two dolphins
swimming in one of these water you know
Parks right and so they're in captivity
but the two dolphins are swimming and
one says to the other of the person
walking along the pool's Edge those
humans they face each other and make
noises but it's not clear they're
actually
communicating and so so who are we to
say that the AI large language is not
actually intelligent if you cannot
otherwise tell the difference who cares
how it generates what it is if it gets
the result that you seek you're going to
say oh well we're intelligent and it's
not how much of that is just human ego
speaking well I'm sure it is human ego
speaking um but in a technical sense
um I
think okay there's a loophole you're
saying because I'm not going to say that
bees are not intelligent when they do
their waggle dance tell other bees where
the honey is and I'm not going to say
termites are not intelligent when they
build something a thousand times bigger
than they are when they make termite Ms
and they all cooperate I'm fatigued by
humans trying to say how special we are
relative to everything else in the world
that has a brain when they do stuff we
can't let me ask you then so what's the
common theme between the termite and the
be and and the policeman reading the
scene what do they all have in common
all of those three things move whereas
the large language model doesn't doesn't
um so that brings us back to this um
action the active part of active
inference so the no to the question
about um large language models um and
attention was that large language models
are just given everything they given all
the data there is no requirement upon
them to select which data are going to
most useful to learn from and therefore
they don't have to build
expressive um fit for purpose World
morals or generative models whereas your
daughter would the two-year-old daughter
playing with the beach ball would have
to by moving and selectively reading the
scene by moving her eyes by observing
her body by observing bows in different
contexts build a much deeper appropriate
world or Jared model that would enable
her to recognize the ball in this
context and that context and ultimately
tell her father I'm playing with a ball
so we had a great show with Brett Kagan
who mentioned your free energy principal
and in his work creating computer chips
out of neurons what people call organoid
intelligence what he was calling
synthetic biological intelligence and
that's in our archives our recent
archives actually recent archives yeah
do you think the answer to AGI is a
biological solution a mechanical
solution or a mixture of both and and
remind people what AGI is artificial
general intelligence I know that's what
the word stand for but what is it not
asking me for the answer don't ask me
either seriously I've been told off for
even using the acronym anymore because
it's so IL defined and people have very
different readings of it so open AI has
a very specific specific meaning uh for
it if you talk to other theoreticians
they would represent it I think um what
people are searching for is natural
intelligence it's natural Gary you know
it ask your question do we have to make
a move towards btic neuromorphic natural
kinds of instantiation of intelligent
Behavior yes absolutely but CH just
coming back to your previous theme
notice we're talking about behaving
systems systems that act and move and
cons SCT and do their own data mining in
a smart way as opposed to just ingesting
all the data um so what I think people
mean when they talk about super
intelligence or G generalized AI or
artificial general intelligence they
just mean natural intelligence kind mean
us it's our brain our brain if you want
to know what a uh AGI is it's our brain
you know and the way no no truck if it
was actually our brain it would be
natural stupidity
our brain without the
stupidity that's really what it
is so back in December 22 You Dropped a
white paper titled designing ecosystems
of intelligence from first principles
now is this a road map for the next 10
years or Beyond or to the terminate it
ultimate destination and then somewhere
along the line you discussed the
thinking behind a move from AI to IIA
and IIA standing for intelligent AG
which seems a lot like moving towards
the architecture for sentient Behavior
have I misread this in any way no you've
read that perfectly so that that white
paper was written with colleagues in
Industry particularly uh versus AI
exactly a kind of road map that um those
people who were committed to a future of
artificial intelligence that was more
sustainable that was um explicitly
committed to a move to Natural
intelligence and all the biomagnetic
moves that you would You' want to make
including implementations on
neuromorphic Hardware uh Quantum
computation and photonics all those
efficient um approaches that um would be
sustainable in the sense of your know
climate change for example but also
speaking to Chuck's notion about
efficiency efficiency is um is also if
you like bait into natural intelligence
in the sense that if you can
describe intelligent Behavior as this
falling downhill pursuing free energy
gradients minimizing free energy getting
to the bottom of the seral packet you're
doing this VI a path of least action
that is the most efficient way of doing
it not only informationally but also in
terms of the amount of electricity you
use and the carbon footprint you leave
behind so from the point of view of
sustainability it's important we get
this right so that part of the of that
white paper was saying there is another
direction of travel away from large
language models large is in the title
it's seductive but it's also very
dangerous it shouldn't be large it
should be the size of a b so to do it
biologically you should be able to do it
much more efficiently and of course the
meme here is that our brains work on 20
watts not 20 kilowatts um and we do more
than any large language model um so that
we have low energy intelligence
we do efficient I guess that's a that's
a way to say it I've seen you quot it
Carl as saying that we are coming out of
the age of information and moving into
the age of intelligence if that's the
case what is the age of intelligence
going to look like or have we already
discussed that well I think we're at its
Inception now dist in virtue all the
wonderful things that are happening
around us and the things that we are
talking about we're asking some some of
the very big questions about you know
what's going what is happening and and
what will happen over the next over the
next decade I think part of the answer
to that lies in your previous um nod to
the the switch between Ai and IIA so IIA
brings agency into play so one deep
question would be is current generative
AI an example of agentic is it an agent
is a large language model an agent and
if not then it can't be intelligent and
certainly can't have generalized
intelligence so what is definitive of
being an agent I put that out there as a
question half expecting a joke
but I've got agent Smith in my head if
anyone can take that and run with it
where yeah there you go it's right about
now where you hear people commenting on
the morality of a decision and whether a
decision is good for civilization or not
and everybody's afraid of AI achieving
conscious
and just declaring that the world would
be better off without humans and I think
we're afraid of that because we know
it's true yeah I was going to say we
we've already come to that conclusion
that's the
problem okay Carl is consciousness the
same as
self-awareness yeah I'm sure there are
lots of people who you could answer that
question of and get a better answer I I
would say the purpose of this
conversation probably not no I think to
be conscious um certainly to be sentient
and to behave in a senent kind of way
would not necessarily imply that you
knew you were a self I'm pretty sure
that a bee doesn't have self-awareness
but it still has sentience it still
experien has experiences and has plans
um and communicates and behaves in a you
know in an intelligent way and you could
also argue that certain um humans um
don't have self-awareness of a fully
developed sort um you know and about
very severe uh psychiatric conditions so
I think self-awareness is is a a gift of
a particular very laborate very deep
gentic model that not only entertains
the consequences of my actions but also
entertains the fantasy or hypothesis
that I am an agent and I am self and can
be self-reflective in a sort of
metacognitive sense so I think um I
think i' differentiate between
self-aware and simply being um being
capable of censing behavior interesting
that great let me play skeptic here for
a moment mild skeptic you've described
you've accounted for human
decision-making and behavior with a
model that connects our sensory the
sensory conduits between what's exterior
to our brain and what we do with that
information as it enters our brain and
you've applied this free energy uh uh
gradient that this information follows
that sounds good it all sounds fine I'm
not going to argue with that but how
does it benefit us to think of things
that way or is it just an after theact
pasti on top of what's we already knew
was going on but now you put fancier
words behind it is there predictive
value to this model or is the
predictivity in your reach because when
you assume that
you can actually make it happen in the
AI Marketplace yeah I think that that's
the key thing so I mean when I'm asked
that question or indeed when I ask that
question of myself I sort of apply it to
things like Hamilton's principle of
least sttion why is that useful well it
becomes very useful when you're actually
sort of building things it becomes very
useful when you're simulating things it
becomes useful when um something does
not comply with a pamp's PRP leased
action so just to unpack those
directions to travel in terms of
applying the free energy principle that
means that you can write down the
equations of motion and now you can
simulate self-organization that has this
natural um kind of intelligence this
natural kind of senent in Behavior you
can simulate it in a robot in an
artifact in a Terminator should you want
to although strictly speaking that would
not be compliant with the free energy
principle um but you can also simulated
in silico and make digital twins of um
people and choices and decision making
and sense making and once you can
simulate you can now use that as an
observation model for real artifacts
that start to phenotype say people with
addiction or say people who are very
creative or say people who had uh
schizophrenia so if you can cast a
Barren imprint of false inference
believing things are uh are present when
they're not or vice versa as an
inference problem and you know what the
principles of sense making and inference
are and you can model that in a computer
you can now go a sampit in which you can
now not only phenotype by adjusting the
model to match somebody's observed
Behavior but now you can go and apply
synthetic drugs or do brain surgery in
silico so there are lots of practical
applications of knowing how things work
well when I say things work how things
behave that presumes that your model is
correct for example just a few decades
ago it was presumed and I think no
longer so that our brain functioned via
neural Nets neural networks where it's a
decision tree and you slide down the
tree to make an Ever more refined
decision on that assumption we then we
then mirrored that in our software to
invoke neural net decision making in my
field in astrophysics how do we decide
what galaxy is interesting to study
versus others in the millions that are
in the data set you just put it all into
a neural net that has parameters that
select for features that we might in the
end of that effort determine to be
interesting we still invoke that but I
think that's no longer the model for how
the brain works but it doesn't matter
it's still helpful to us you're right
and honestly that is now how a i is
organized around the new way that we see
the brain working yeah so so and what
and why is the brain the model of what
should be emulated I mean the human
physiological system is Rife with
baggage evolutionary baggage much of it
is of no utility to us today except
sitting there available to be hijacked
by advertisers or other
who will take advantage of some feature
we had 30,000 years ago when it mattered
for our survival and today it's just
dangling there waiting to be
exploited
so a straight answer to your question
the free energy principle is really you
know a description or a recipe for
self-organization of things that possess
um a set of preferred or characteristic
States coming right back to where we
started which is the bottom of the
serial packet if that's where I live if
I want to be there that's where I'm
comfortable then I can give you a
calculus that will um for any given
situation prescribe the Dynamics and the
behavior and the sense making and the
choices to get you to that to to that
point it is not a prescription for what
is uh the best place to be or what the
best um embodied form of that being
should be in saying that if you exist
and you want to exist in a sustainable
way where it could be you know a species
or it could be a a meme in a given
environment yes in a given set it's all
about it's all about the relationship
you that's a really key point so the
variational fre that we've been talking
about the prediction eror is a measure
of the way that something couples to its
universe or to its world it's not it's
not a statement about a thing in
isolation it's the fit it's you know
again if you just take the notion of
prediction error the something that's
predicting and there's something being
predicted so it's all relational it's
all observational it's it's a a measure
of adaptive Fitness that's an important
clarification here yes Carl could you
give us a few sentences on basian
inference that's a new word to many
people who even claim to know some
statistics that's a it's a way of using
what you already know to be true to help
you decide what's going to happen next
are there any more subtleties to a
basian inference than that I think what
you just said um captures the key point
it's all about updating so it's a way of
describing inference by which people
just mean estimating the best
explanation probabilistically a process
of inference that is ongoing so
sometimes this is called Asing belief
updating updating one's belief in the
face of new data and how do you do that
update in a mathematically optimal way
you simply take the New Evidence the new
data you combine it using Bas rule with
your pride beliefs established before
you saw those new data to give you a
belief afterwards sometimes called a
posterior belief go otherwise you would
just come up with a hypothesis assuming
you don't know anything about the system
and that's not always the fastest way to
get the answer yeah so you could
argue is important you can't do it it
has to be a process it has to be a path
through some belief space you're always
updating whether it's at an evolutionary
scale or whether it's during this
conversation you can't start from
scratch and you're using the word belief
the way here State side we might use the
word what's supported by evidence so
it's not that I believe something is
true often the word belief is just well
I believe in Jesus or Jesus Is My Savior
Muhammad so belief is I'll believe that
no matter what you tell me because
that's my belief right and my belief is
protected constit tionally uh on those
grounds when you move scientifically
through data and more data comes to
support it then I will ascribe
confidence in the result measured by the
evidence that supports it so it's an
evidentiary supported belief yeah yeah I
guess if we have to say belief then it's
what is the strength of your belief it
is it is measured by the strength of the
evidence behind it yeah that's how we
have to say that so Gary do you have any
last questions before we got to land
This Plane yeah I do because um if I
think about us as humans uh we have
sadly some of us have psychotic otes
schizophrenia uh if someone has
hallucinations they have a neurological
problem that's going on inside their
mind yet we are told that AI can have
hallucinations I don't know if it's if
does AI have mental illness hey I just
learned to lie that's all you know you
ask it a question it does does know the
answer and it's just like all right well
how about this that's what we do in
school right you don't know the answer
up it might be right right exactly you
what's the answer ah Rockets
okay yeah uh I I I I was speaking to
Gary Marcus in Davos a few months ago
and he was tell me he invented the world
or applied the world the word
hallucination context and it became word
of the year I think in in in some
circles and I think he regrets it now
because the spirit in which he was using
it was um technically very divorced from
the way that people hallucinate um and I
think it's a really important question
that you know theoreticians and
neuroscientists um have to think about
in in terms of understanding false
imprints in a brain and just to pick up
an Neil's point at the when we talk
about beliefs we're talking about
subpersonal nonpropositional Basin
beliefs that you you you wouldn't be
able to articulate these These are the
way that the brain encodes problemistic
the causes of its Sensations and of
course if you get that inference process
wrong you're going to be subject to
inferring things are there when they're
not which is basically hallucinations
and delusions or inferring things are
not there when they are and this also
happens to thas in terms of neglect
syndromes dissociative syndromes
hysterical syndromes these can be
devastating conditions where you've just
got the inference wrong so understand
the mechanics of this failed inference I
think for example Hallucination is
absolutely crucial it usually tracks
back to what we're talking about before
in terms of the ability to select versus
ignore different parts of the data so if
you've lost the ability to ignore stuff
then very often you preclude an ability
to make sense of it because you're
always attending to the surface
structure of Sensations take for example
severe autism um you may not get past
the
bombardment of sensory input in all
modalities of all parts of the scene on
all parts of your sensory all alive
right it's all alive guys I think we got
go to call it quits there Carl this has
been highly Illuminating yes good stuff
and what's interesting is as much as
you've accomplished thus far we all deep
down know it's only just the beginning
and who knows where the next year much
less five years will take this it be
interesting to check back in with you
and see what you're making in your
basement
um with the Brit Neil it's garage oh
garage you guys the basements is more
the garage we go out
there of wonderful things yeah exactly
exactly okay Professor Carl thanks for
joining us thank you very much
conversation the chokes particularly
soome I've ever done conversation thanks
for joining us from London thank you uh
time shifted from us here Stateside
again we're delighted that you could
share your expertise with us in this
Star Talk Special Edition all right
Chuck always good to have you man always
a pleasure all right Gary pleasure Neil
thank you I'm Neil degrass Tyson your
personal astrophysicist as always
bidding you to keep looking up
a